# Using gRPC

## Introduction to gRPC and Protobuf


### What is gRPC?

* A message passing technique developed by Google in 2015.
* gRPC stands for g Remote Procedure Calls* where the g stands for something different in every release of gRPC. For example, the g in gRPC 1.12 stands for glorious.
* Programming-language agnostic
* Seeing greater traction and adoption in the industry.
* Compared to REST, gRPC provides greater performance at the expense of less flexibility.
* Clients that call gRPC can treat it as a method call in their own application by stubbing the gRPC service.
* Does not require an HTTP library to make an API request because the application code can call a method that is "hooked up" to a gRPC service internally.

### gRPC is Fast!

1. Leverages HTTP/2 for transporting messages
2. Transports binary data
3. Uses protocol buffers (protobufs) for efficiently transporting structured data

### HTTP/2

* gRPC takes advantage of the HTTP/2 protocol.
* There are changes introduced in HTTP/2 that improve the overall security and performance of the web.
* We need to acknowledge the fact that by using HTTP/2, gRPC can significantly improve its performance with regards to response sizes and overhead of connections.

For more details on HTTP/2, I encourage you to visit the Additional Reading section below.

**Message Sizes**

* Messages are transmitted as binary data.
* This reduces the overall size of the payload and thereby improving the request and response times.

**Connections Overhead**

* Traditionally, an HTTP request could end up creating more HTTP requests that are blocking in nature.
* HTTP/2 helps reduce this overhead and make more efficient use of resources by multiplexing its data with a unique connection between the client and server.

### **Protocol Buffers**

* A Protocol buffer, also known as a protobuf, is another way to serialize messages. We can think of it as an alternative to JSON or YAML with its set of tradeoffs.
* gRPC uses protobufs to pass its messages.
* Protobuf messages are designed to be backward and forwards compatible.
* Clients that are processing a message expecting an older or newer version of the message will simply ignore fields they don't recognize.

**Structured Data**

* Using protocol buffers helps us clearly define and lock down our interfaces to provide type safety and less confusion.

**Analogy**

We can think of using a `dict` versus using a `class` in Python:

1. The `dict` is flexible but doesn't have enforcement on what values go into it. A client reading a `dict` may run into `KeyErrorException` errors from trying to read bad data.
2. A `class` defines which fields are used and sets up a straightforward interface. `dict` 's are very flexible and allow us to be more efficient at the expense of safety.

A `dict` is similar to using REST while a `class` is similar to using gRPC.

### Protobuf Messages


When we create a protobuf message, we are defining the format of the message.
### Protobuf vs. JSON

Protobuf messages define what an item must be. `JSON` defines what an item should be.

* Protobuf - breaks if schema is modified and is strictly typed
* JSON - schema can be modified and typing is not enforced

**Protobuf message**
```protobuf
message Item {
  string name = 1;
  string brand_name = 2;
  int32 id = 3;
  float weight = 4;
}
```
The message defines the fields for the `Item` field.

1. Each field has a type associated with it.
2. The integers at the end of each field are not values but are assignments used to declare field numbers. These are crucial in helping protobuf handle binary blobs of data.

Note that you may see some examples in other sources use `required` and `optional` for the fields in their messages. Those were removed in the `proto3` version.

**JSON message**
```json
{
    "id": <item_id: string>,
    "brand_name": <string>,
    "name": <string>,
    "weight": <float>,
}
```
**Binary Data**

* Protobufs are designed to be serialized into binary blobs, making it very efficient to transport our data "over the wire" through a network.
* Compared to human-readable formats like JSON: these binary messages can't be read without first being decoded and we can't simply craft a binary message in our text editors.

**Message Size**

Binary data also helps reduce the size of messages. Data is stored in a way that is efficient for machines to process but unreadable for humans.

* Message size matters in response times for APIs.
* A message that's 50 bytes will respond much faster than a message that is 50 Mb in size. In the context of an API that is processing thousands of requests per second, the effects of message size can add up!

### **Protobuf Service**

* Unlike REST, we also define how our API messages are used in gRPC.
* Protobuf services define our input and outputs of our services.
```protobuf
Service ItemService {
    rpc Create(ItemMessage) returns (ItemMessage)
}
```
In the example above, we declare that an `ItemService` has a method that accepts an `ItemMessage` and returns an `ItemMessage`

* Sets strict interface on how a user is expected to interact with the service.
* No logic needs to be implemented; we simply define how a user will interact with ItemService

### Using gRPC


By using binary data, Protobuf messages passed in gRPC are significantly smaller in size than message formats like JSON:

* Binary encodings are efficient and have a small footprint.
* JSON has a lot of brackets and syntax that increase the size of the payload.

**Decoding**

* Since protobufs are a form of structured data, the binary data can be decoded very quickly. * * Compare this with a format like JSON, which is simply an unstructured string that needs to be parsed into some data structure before it can be properly consumed.

### gRPC vs. REST Overview

* REST has wider adoption
* gRPC is more structured
* gRPC is faster out-of-the-box

In general, gRPC provides more speed and structure at the expense of less flexibility and more overhead of setup.
### Use Cases for gRPC

There are many uses cases for gRPC.

**Need for Speed**

* gRPC boasts better performance than REST, but this doesn't mean that we should default to using gRPC for everything.
* REST currently has significantly more adoption than gRPC, and REST can be designed to be very performant.

**Microservices**

* Microservices communicate with one another via a network and rely on message passing.
* Network calls inherently take more time to process than functionality contained in a single network like most monoliths.
* For internal systems that dictate fast performance, gRPC may be used by modules in a microservice to pass messages with one another.

**Mobile Devices**

* Mobile devices can integrate well with gRPC without an intermediary proxy to the backend service.
* Applications can invoke function calls directly as if it were local code. To illustrate with Python, the method can accept objects instead of serializing and deserializing a dict object.

### gRPC Protobuf Requirements
**Basics**

These the minimum requirements for a gRPC protobuf message:

* Typing - type definition such as if a field is a string, float, etc
* Field Name - the key for the value you are storing data
* Order Number - used by gRPC for managing binary serialization

**Some Other Features**

These are a few features of protobufs that enrich our message definitions:

* Enum - denotes what values a string can be
* Nested Type - define a type as a user-defined type such as an enum
* Default Value - set gRPC to set a default value when none is provided

To learn more about available features, I encourage you to reference the Proto3 Language Guide.

We've gone over how to create protobuf messages. We will learn about how to introduce them into our application code to build clients and servers in the next lesson.
### New Terms
|Term	| Definition|
|--------|-----------|
|gRPC	|Programming-agnostic way of passing messages as protocol buffers to enforce a strict interface|
|HTTP/2	|More secure and performant way of making HTTP requests that is backwards compatible|
|Protocol buffers|	A way to serialize structured data optimizing simplicity and performance|

### Learn More About gRPC

While we went over some concepts on a higher level, the following are some resources if you would like to dive into more detail about them:

* Protobuf
* HTTP/2